-- my SQL--

show all databases : show databases;
create a database : create database database_name;
use database : use database_name;
delete a database : drop database database_name;
display current database : select database;

datatypes :
	char : store fixed length character
	varchar : store variable lengrh character strings
	int : store whole numbers
	decimal(p,d) : store exact decimal numbers
			. p(precision) is the total number of didits
			. d(scale) is the number of digits after the decimal point
	date : store date yyyy-mm-dd
	time : store time hh:mm:ss
	datetime : store both date and time

creating a table:
	create table table_name(column1 datatype,column2 datatype,...);
	eg:- create table student(id int,name varchar(50),age int,course varchar(50));

show all tables in the database: show tables;
describe table structure : describe table_name; or desc table_name;
deleting a table : drop table table_name;
# default value set cheyyan create table il column datatype koode default 'value' kodtha mathi.. 


inserting and retrieving data :
	insert into table_name(column1,column2,...) values(value1,value2,...) 
	eg:- insert into student(name,age,grade,birth_date)values(1,'arjun',20,'A+','2004-05-15'),(2,'meera',19,'B-','2005-08-21');

retrieving data :
	fetching all records: select * from table_name;
	specific column mathi enkil : select column1,column2 from table_name;


primary key :
	is a column or a set of columns in a table that uniquely identifies each row. it is not null and cannot repeate..
	ith set cheyyan primary key enna constrint kodthal mathi.. eg: create table il id int primary key.

not null constraint : name varchar(100) not null

where clause :
	used to filter records in a select,update, or delete statement. it helps retrieve only the rows that match a specific condition..
	syntax : select colomn1,column2 from table_name where condition;
	eg: select * from student where age>20;
	    select * from student where course="cs";
		select * from student where not name="anu";

update query :
	update table_name set column1=value1,column2=value2 where condition;
	eg: update student set course="cs",age=25 where id in (3,4);

delete query :
	delete from table_name where condition;
	eg: delete from student where id=3;

order by query :
	the order by clause is used to sort query results in ascending(asc)or descending(desc) order.
	syntax: select column1,column2 from table_name order by column_name [asc|desc];
	eg: select * from student order by name asc;

limit query :
	the limit clause is used to restrict the number of rows returned in a select query or limit the number of affected in delete or update queries.

	syntax: select column1,column2 from table_name limit number_of_rows;
	eg: select * from student order by name asc limit 2;


Aggregate functions :
	Aggregate functions perform calculations on multiple rows and return a single result. they are often used with the GROUP BY clause.
	count() : count the number of rows eg: count(*)
	sum() : calculates the total sum eg: sum(salary)
	avg() : returns the average value eg: avg(age)
	min() : finds the minimum value eg: min(price)
	max() : finds the maximum value eg: max(score)

	eg: select count(*) as count_student from student;  as- aliasis :pakaram name nmk kodkam..


GROUP BY clause:
	is used to group rows with the same values in a column and perform aggregate functions like count(),sum(),avg(),min(),and max() on each group..
	syntax: select column_name,aggregate_function(column_name) from table_name group by column_name;
	eg: select course,count(*) as student_count from student group by course;


IN and BETWEEN operators:
	in : matches a value in a list eg: where course in ('math','cs');
	not in : excludes values from a list eg: where age not in (20,21);
	between : select values within a range eg: where marks between 80 and 90;
	not between : excludes values outside a range eg: where age not between 18 and 25;


CASE statement :..................


Relationships :
	refers to the connection between two or more tables based on a common field.
	types of relatiionships :
		1.one-to-one(1:1) relationship
		2.one-to-many(1:m) relationship
		3.many-to-many(m:n) relationship

Foreign key :
	foreign key is a column that establishes a relationship between two tables by referring to the primary key of another table.

	eg:
		create table customers(
			customerId primary key int
			name varchar(50),
			email varchar(100)
		);	
		
		create table orders(
			orderId int primary key,
			customerId int,
			productName varchar(100),
			quantity int,
			price decimal(10,2),
			totalPrice decimal(10,2),
			orderdate date
			foreign key (customerId) references customers(customerId)
		);
		ithinte insertion undd ezhtheetilla...



JOIN :
	a join is used to combine data from two or more tables based on a related column. join cheyyunnath foreign key column use cheithitanu..
	types of JOINs :
		. inner join : returns matching records from both tables.. common datas mathre result il kitollu..
		. left join : returns all records from the left table and matching records from the right table
		.right join : returns all records from the right table and matching records from the left table


	syntax: SELECT table1.column1, table2.column2 FROM table1 INNER JOIN table2 ON table1.common_column1 = table2.common_column2;



LIKE :
	the LIKE operator is used to search for a specified pattern in a column.
	it is commonly used with WHERE to filter results based on partial matches.

	syntax: select column1,column2,... from table_name where column_name LIKE 'pattern';
	eg:- 
	pattern : 'a%' start with a
		  '%a' ends with a
		  '%a%' anywhere a



Alter table :
	used to modify an existing table by adding,deleting,or changing columns and constraints..
	table structure il enthenkilm chnges varuthan..

	syntax: alter table table_name action;
	eg: alter table customers add column phoneNumber varchar(15);
	alter table customers modify column phoneNumber varchar(20);
	alter table customers change column phoneNumber contactnumber varchar(20);
	alter table customers drop column contactnumber;
	alter table customers rename clients;


